.\" witnessd - Cryptographic Authorship Witnessing
.TH WITNESSD 1 "January 2025" "witnessd" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
witnessd \- cryptographic authorship witnessing system
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B witnessd
.I command
.RI [ options ]
.RI [ arguments ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B witnessd
is a cryptographic authorship witnessing system that creates tamper-evident
proof of document creation over time. It uses Verifiable Delay Functions (VDF),
Merkle Mountain Ranges (MMR), and Ed25519 signatures to prove that content
was authored incrementally by a human.
.PP
The system proves:
.IP \(bu 2
Content states form an unbroken cryptographic chain
.IP \(bu 2
Minimum time elapsed between commits (via VDF)
.IP \(bu 2
Real keystrokes occurred over time (jitter evidence)
.IP \(bu 2
Your signed declaration of the creative process
.SH COMMANDS
.TP
.B init
Initialize witnessd - creates keys, identity, and database. Creates the
~/.witnessd directory structure and sets up default configuration.
.TP
.BI "commit " file " [-m " message ]
Create a checkpoint for a file with VDF time proof. Records file state with
cryptographic hash and VDF proof.
.TP
.BI "log " [file]
Show checkpoint history for a file or list all tracked files.
.TP
.BI "export " file " [-tier " tier "] [-o " output "] [-f " format ]
Export evidence packet with declaration for verification. Tiers: basic,
standard, enhanced, maximum. Formats: json, war.
.TP
.BI "verify " file
Verify the integrity of a database or evidence packet (.json, .war, .db).
.TP
.BI "presence " action
Manage presence verification sessions (start, stop, status).
.TP
.BI "track " action
Track keyboard activity for typing evidence (start, stop, status).
.TP
.B calibrate
Calibrate VDF performance for this machine.
.TP
.B status
Show witnessd status and configuration.
.TP
.B list
List all tracked documents.
.TP
.BI "watch " [action] " [" folder ]
Watch folders for automatic checkpointing (add, remove, list).
.TP
.B start
Start the witnessd daemon in the background.
.TP
.B stop
Stop the witnessd daemon.
.TP
.BI "fingerprint " action
Manage author fingerprints (activity, voice).
.TP
.B version
Show version information.
.TP
.B help
Show help message.
.SH BASIC WORKFLOW
.IP 1. 4
.B witnessd init
\- One-time setup
.IP 2. 4
Write your document
.IP 3. 4
.B witnessd commit doc.md -m "first draft"
\- Create checkpoint
.IP 4. 4
Continue writing
.IP 5. 4
.B witnessd commit doc.md -m "revisions"
\- More checkpoints
.IP 6. 4
.B witnessd export doc.md
\- Export evidence when done
.IP 7. 4
.B witnessd verify evidence.json
\- Verify evidence packet
.SH ENHANCED WORKFLOW
For stronger evidence with keystroke tracking:
.IP 1. 4
.B witnessd track start doc.md
\- Start tracking daemon
.IP 2. 4
Write your document
.IP 3. 4
.B witnessd track status
\- Check keystroke count
.IP 4. 4
.B witnessd commit doc.md -m "..."
\- Creates checkpoint with jitter chain
.IP 5. 4
.B witnessd track stop
\- Stop tracking
.IP 6. 4
.B witnessd export doc.md -tier core
\- Export with jitter evidence
.SH FILES
.TP
.I ~/.witnessd/
Main data directory
.TP
.I ~/.witnessd/config.json
Configuration file with VDF parameters
.TP
.I ~/.witnessd/signing_key
Ed25519 private signing key (mode 0600)
.TP
.I ~/.witnessd/signing_key.pub
Ed25519 public key
.TP
.I ~/.witnessd/chains/
Checkpoint chains for tracked documents
.TP
.I ~/.witnessd/sessions/
Presence verification sessions
.TP
.I ~/.witnessd/tracking/
Keystroke tracking sessions
.SH PRIVACY
The keystroke tracking feature counts keystrokes but does NOT capture which
keys are pressed. This is NOT a keylogger. Only event counts and timing
are recorded.
.SH EVIDENCE TIERS
Per draft-condrey-rats-pop CDDL: content-tier = core(1) / enhanced(2) / maximum(3).
.TP
.B core
Checkpoint chain + VDF proofs + keystroke jitter evidence
.TP
.B enhanced
Adds TPM/hardware attestation
.TP
.B maximum
All available evidence layers including behavioral analysis
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B WITNESSD_HOME
Override the default ~/.witnessd directory
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Success
.TP
.B 1
Error occurred
.SH EXAMPLES
Initialize and create first checkpoint:
.PP
.RS
.nf
$ witnessd init
$ witnessd calibrate
$ witnessd commit paper.tex -m "Initial draft"
.fi
.RE
.PP
Export evidence with keystroke tracking:
.PP
.RS
.nf
$ witnessd track start paper.tex
$ # ... write for several hours ...
$ witnessd commit paper.tex -m "Final version"
$ witnessd track stop
$ witnessd export paper.tex -tier core -o paper.evidence.json
.fi
.RE
.PP
Verify someone else's evidence:
.PP
.RS
.nf
$ witnessd verify submission.evidence.json
.fi
.RE
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR witnessctl (1)
.SH BUGS
Report bugs at https://github.com/writerslogic/witnessd/issues
.SH AUTHOR
David Condrey
.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright \(co 2024-2026. Licensed under the Apache License 2.0.
