.\" wld - Cryptographic Authorship Witnessing
.TH WLD 1 "January 2025" "wld" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
wld \- cryptographic authorship witnessing system
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B wld
.I command
.RI [ options ]
.RI [ arguments ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B wld
is a cryptographic authorship witnessing system that creates tamper-evident
proof of document creation over time. It uses Verifiable Delay Functions (VDF),
Merkle Mountain Ranges (MMR), and Ed25519 signatures to prove that content
was authored incrementally by a human.
.PP
The system proves:
.IP \(bu 2
Content states form an unbroken cryptographic chain
.IP \(bu 2
Minimum time elapsed between commits (via VDF)
.IP \(bu 2
Real keystrokes occurred over time (jitter evidence)
.IP \(bu 2
Your signed declaration of the creative process
.SH COMMANDS
.TP
.B init
Initialize wld - creates keys, identity, and database. Creates the
~/.wld directory structure and sets up default configuration.
.TP
.BI "commit " file " [-m " message ]
Create a checkpoint for a file with VDF time proof. Records file state with
cryptographic hash and VDF proof.
.TP
.BI "log " [file]
Show checkpoint history for a file or list all tracked files.
.TP
.BI "export " file " [-tier " tier "] [-o " output "] [-f " format ]
Export evidence packet with declaration for verification. Tiers: basic,
standard, enhanced, maximum. Formats: json, war.
.TP
.BI "verify " file
Verify the integrity of a database or evidence packet (.json, .war, .db).
.TP
.BI "presence " action
Manage presence verification sessions (start, stop, status).
.TP
.BI "track " action
Track keyboard activity for typing evidence (start, stop, status).
.TP
.B calibrate
Calibrate VDF performance for this machine.
.TP
.B status
Show wld status and configuration.
.TP
.B list
List all tracked documents.
.TP
.BI "watch " [action] " [" folder ]
Watch folders for automatic checkpointing (add, remove, list).
.TP
.B start
Start the wld daemon in the background.
.TP
.B stop
Stop the wld daemon.
.TP
.BI "fingerprint " action
Manage author fingerprints (activity, voice).
.TP
.B version
Show version information.
.TP
.B help
Show help message.
.SH BASIC WORKFLOW
.IP 1. 4
.B wld init
\- One-time setup
.IP 2. 4
Write your document
.IP 3. 4
.B wld commit doc.md -m "first draft"
\- Create checkpoint
.IP 4. 4
Continue writing
.IP 5. 4
.B wld commit doc.md -m "revisions"
\- More checkpoints
.IP 6. 4
.B wld export doc.md
\- Export evidence when done
.IP 7. 4
.B wld verify evidence.json
\- Verify evidence packet
.SH ENHANCED WORKFLOW
For stronger evidence with keystroke tracking:
.IP 1. 4
.B wld track start doc.md
\- Start tracking daemon
.IP 2. 4
Write your document
.IP 3. 4
.B wld track status
\- Check keystroke count
.IP 4. 4
.B wld commit doc.md -m "..."
\- Creates checkpoint with jitter chain
.IP 5. 4
.B wld track stop
\- Stop tracking
.IP 6. 4
.B wld export doc.md -tier core
\- Export with jitter evidence
.SH FILES
.TP
.I ~/.wld/
Main data directory
.TP
.I ~/.wld/config.json
Configuration file with VDF parameters
.TP
.I ~/.wld/signing_key
Ed25519 private signing key (mode 0600)
.TP
.I ~/.wld/signing_key.pub
Ed25519 public key
.TP
.I ~/.wld/chains/
Checkpoint chains for tracked documents
.TP
.I ~/.wld/sessions/
Presence verification sessions
.TP
.I ~/.wld/tracking/
Keystroke tracking sessions
.SH PRIVACY
The keystroke tracking feature counts keystrokes but does NOT capture which
keys are pressed. This is NOT a keylogger. Only event counts and timing
are recorded.
.SH EVIDENCE TIERS
Per draft-condrey-rats-pop CDDL: content-tier = core(1) / enhanced(2) / maximum(3).
.TP
.B core
Checkpoint chain + VDF proofs + keystroke jitter evidence
.TP
.B enhanced
Adds TPM/hardware attestation
.TP
.B maximum
All available evidence layers including behavioral analysis
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B WLD_HOME
Override the default ~/.wld directory
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Success
.TP
.B 1
Error occurred
.SH EXAMPLES
Initialize and create first checkpoint:
.PP
.RS
.nf
$ wld init
$ wld calibrate
$ wld commit paper.tex -m "Initial draft"
.fi
.RE
.PP
Export evidence with keystroke tracking:
.PP
.RS
.nf
$ wld track start paper.tex
$ # ... write for several hours ...
$ wld commit paper.tex -m "Final version"
$ wld track stop
$ wld export paper.tex -tier core -o paper.evidence.json
.fi
.RE
.PP
Verify someone else's evidence:
.PP
.RS
.nf
$ wld verify submission.evidence.json
.fi
.RE
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR wld (1)
.SH BUGS
Report bugs at https://github.com/writerslogic/wld/issues
.SH AUTHOR
David Condrey
.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright \(co 2024-2026. Licensed under the Apache License 2.0.
